.TH scsiexec 1
.SH NAME
scsiexec \- SCSI command execution tool for PiSCSI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scsiexec
\fB\-t\fR \fIID[:LUN]\fR
[\fB\-i\fR \fIBID\fR]
\fB\-f\fR \fIFILENAME\fR
[\fB\-b\fR]
[\fB\-F\fR]
[\fB\-B\fR]
[\fB\-T\fR]
[\fB\-t\tR] ID[:LUN]
[\fB\-L\fR \fILOG_LEVEL\fR]
[\fB\-X\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B scsiexec
wraps protobuf input data into a custom PiSCSI SCSI command, has piscsi execute it and display the results. The input data must be a legal command for the PiSCSi protobuf interface. See the file piscsi_interface.proto for details.

.SH NOTES

.B scsiexec
helps with advanced testing. It requires two connected PiSCSI boards. The board scsiexec is running on must be a FULLSPEC board because scsiexec requires SCSI initiator mode support.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-t\fI " "\fIID[:LUN]
SCSI ID and optional LUN of the second PiSCSI board. The remote SCSI device will be functioning as the "Target" device.
.TP
.BR \-i\fI " "\fIBID
SCSI ID of the PiSCSI device. If not specified, the PiSCSI device will use ID 7. The PiSCSI host will be functioning as the "Initiator" device.
.TP
.BR \-f\fI " "\fIFILE
The protobuf data input file, by default in JSON format.
.TP
.BR \-b\fI
Signals that the input file is in protobuf binary format.
.TP
.BR \-F\fI
Signals that the input file is in protobuf text format.
.TP
.BR \-B\fI
Generate a protobuf binary format file.
.TP
.BR \-T\fI
Generate a protobuf text format file.
.TP
.BR \-L\fI " " \fILOG_LEVEL
Set the log level (trace, debug, info, warning, error, off). The default log level is 'info'.
.TP
.BR \-X\fI
Shut down piscsi with a SCSI command.

.SH SEE ALSO
scsictl(1), piscsi(1), scsidump(1), scsimon(1)
 
Full documentation is available at: <https://www.piscsi.com>
